# victoria
A C-like systems programming language for my own needs

## Project overview

This is the reference compiler project for the Victoria programming language.

The project includes two compilers: a boostrap compiler, written in C, which compiles only a subset of
Victoria, known as rVic; and the full Victoria compiler, written in rVic. The main use case of the bootstrap
compiler is to compile the main compiler.

### Getting the compiler

There are currently no pre-built binaries, so the only way to get the compiler is to build from source and
bootstrap the compiler.

### Bootstrapping

> [!NOTE]
> The main compiler is currently unfinished. Use the bootstrap compiler to compile rVic code.

To bootstrap the compiler, you can run `make bootstrap` in the project root directory (here), or simply
run `make` in the ./bootstrap/ directoy. This automates the boostrappping process.

#### Manual bootstrapping

Alternatively, you can manually bootrap the compiler. Simply compile all the .c sources in ./bootstrap/
into a single executable (called crvic/crvic.exe by the Makefile, but you can give it any name).

For instance:

```shell
cc *.c -o crvic
```

Then, use that program to build the source code in ./src/ and then compile the output with you C compiler:

```shell
./bootsrap/crvic ./src/main.vic
cc ./src/main.c ./bootstrap/lexer.c -o ./bin/vic
```

#### Testing the bootstrapped compiler

> [!WARNING]
> This will not work at the moment because the main commpiler is unfinished.

> [!NOTE]
> The c code generated by the compiler depends on ./bootstrap/lexer.c, so isn't fully self-hosted. This is
> because lexing is currently handled by my lexing library [lexel](https://github.com/Ninesquared81/lexel),
> and lexer.c is a convenient wrapper for calling this from Victoria.

You can test that the bootstrapping process worked by using the main compiler to compile itself:

```shell
./bin/vic ./src/main.vic
cc ./src/main.c ./bootstrap/lexer.c -o ./bin/vic1
mv ./bin/vic1 ./bin/vic
```

## Language overview

> [!NOTE]
> The following overview is mainly so I can get some ideas on (virtual) paper. The actual implementation
> is nowhere near what is described here. I may even remove stuff from here once I have proper docs.

### Pointers

A pointer to type T is deonted by the syntax following syntax `^` _modifiers_ `T`.

For example, `^u8` deontes a read-only pointer to an unsigned byte (unsigned 8-bit integer).

#### Generic pointers

The type `!` may be used as the pointed-to type to create a generic pointer. Generic pointers carry
no type information and cannot be dereferenced. A pointer to any type can be implcitly converted to
a generic pointer. N.B., a generic pointer assumes its pointed-to value is byte-aligned, although this
behaviout can be overridden (see [Alignment modifiers](#alignment-modifiers)).

#### Modifiers

A pointer type may include modifiers. Several modifiers may be combined, but some are mutually-exclusive.
They are separated into different categories.

##### Read-/Write-access modifiers

> [!WARNING]
> `out` modifiers currently have only partial support

These modifiers affect how pointers can be used in derefence operations.

* _no modifier_ &rarr; Read-only pointer. The pointed-to value cannot be assigned to.

* `mut` &rarr; Read and write. The pointed to value may be mutated freely.

* `out` &rarr; Write before read. The pointed to value must be assigned to before it can be read from.
This is usually used in function parameter lists to denote an out paramater &ndash; a pointer argument
whose pointed-to value is meangingless when the function is called and will be written to by the function.
Once an `out` pointer has been written to in the scope in which it is defined (along all execution
paths), it acts like a `mut` pointer.

These three modifiers are all mutually exclusive with each other.

##### Alignment modifiers

> [!WARNING]
> Alignment modifiers are not yet supported

These modifiers turn a normal pointer into a specific-alignment pointer. A specific-alignment pointer
points to a value which may have stricter alignment requirements than the pointed-to type.

The syntax for a specific-alignment pointer is as follows `^%A T`. This denotes a pointer to type `T`
with the same alignment requirements as type `A`. Note that `^` and `%` are treated as separate tokens, so
need not be directly juxtaposed.

A specific-alignment pointer cannot specify a weaker alignment requirement than its pointed-to type.

At most one alignment modifier is allowed per pointer. A pointer with no alignment modifier acts like
a pointer specified thusly, `^%T T`, i.e., it assumes its pointed-to value is aligned per its own alignment
requirements.

#### Combining modifiers

Modifiers from different categories may be combined together. For example, a mutable generic pointer to
`u32`-aligned data is specified as `^%u32 mut!`. The pointed-to type must come last, but modifiers
can be specified in any order, so `^mut %u32!` is an equivalent declaration. Since `u32` and `i32` have
the same alignment requirement, `^%i32 mut!` may be used in any context where the previous type is
expected and vice-versa.
